sl beta docs (#3705)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/dbt-sl.md

id: dbt-sl
description: "Learn how the dbt Semantic Layer enables data teams to centrally define and query metrics."
sidebar_label: "About the dbt Semantic Layer"
tags: [Semantic Layer]
hide_table_of_contents: true
---

<VersionBlock firstVersion="1.6">

import NewSLChanges from '/snippets/_new-sl-changes.md';

<NewSLChanges />

The dbt Semantic Layer, powered by [MetricFlow](/docs/build/about-metricflow), simplifies the process of defining and using critical business metrics, like `revenue` in the modeling layer (your dbt project). By centralizing metric definitions, data teams can ensure consistent self-service access to these metrics in downstream data tools and applications. The dbt Semantic Layer eliminates duplicate coding by allowing data teams to define metrics on top of existing models and automatically handles data joins. 

Moving metric definitions out of the BI layer and into the modeling layer allows data teams to feel confident that different business units are working from the same metric definitions, regardless of their tool of choice. If a metric definition changes in dbt, it’s refreshed everywhere it’s invoked and creates consistency across all applications. 

> To learn more about why you need a universal Semantic Layer, refer to the [Why we need a universal semantic layer](https://www.getdbt.com/blog/universal-semantic-layer/)  blog post.

Reviewer: oops, sorry! missed the repetition with "why .... "

```suggestion
Refer to the [Why we need a universal semantic layer](https://www.getdbt.com/blog/universal-semantic-layer/)  blog post to learn more.
```

---
title: "dbt Semantic Layer"
id: dbt-sl

> description: "Introducing the improved dbt Semantic Layer, which allows data teams to centrally define and query metrics."

Reviewer: sugg: description reads like a snapshot in time. consider updating it so it's more evergreen, e.g. a quick overview of dbt SL

sidebar_label: "About the dbt Semantic Layer"
tags: [Semantic Layer]
hide_table_of_contents: true
---

<VersionBlock firstVersion="1.6">

import NewSLChanges from '/snippets/_new-sl-changes.md';

<NewSLChanges />

> The dbt Semantic Layer, powered by [MetricFlow](/docs/build/about-metricflow), simplifies the process of defining and using critical business metrics, like `revenue` in the modeling layer (your dbt project). By centralizing metric definitions, data teams can ensure consistent self-service access to these metrics in downstream data tools and applications. The dbt Semantic Layer eliminates duplicate coding by allowing you to define metrics on top of existing models and automatically handles data joins. 

Reviewer: sugg consistency with using third person (data teams/users) and second person (you/your) within same paragraph

```suggestion
The dbt Semantic Layer, powered by [MetricFlow](/docs/build/about-metricflow), simplifies the process of defining and using critical business metrics, like `revenue` in the modeling layer (your dbt project). By centralizing metric definitions, data teams can ensure consistent self-service access to these metrics in downstream data tools and applications. The dbt Semantic Layer eliminates duplicate coding by allowing data teams to define metrics on top of existing models and automatically handles data joins. 
```

Moving metric definitions out of the BI layer and into the modeling layer allows data teams to feel confident that different business units are working from the same metric definitions, regardless of their tool of choice. If a metric definition changes in dbt, it’s refreshed everywhere it’s invoked and creates consistency across all applications. 

> To read more about why you need a universal Semantic Layer, read this [blog post](https://www.getdbt.com/blog/universal-semantic-layer/).

Reviewer: sugg: avoid using the word "read" for inclusivity of less abled people (e.g. the reader could be a blind person). 

```suggestion
To learn more about why you need a universal Semantic Layer, refer to the [Why we need a universal semantic layer](https://www.getdbt.com/blog/universal-semantic-layer/)  blog post.
```

Author: good shout, thank you for catching it!

## Explore the dbt Semantic Layer
<!-- this partial lives here: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/website/snippets/_sl-plan-info. Use it on diff pages and to tailor the message depending which instance can access the SL and what product lifecycle we're in. -->

import Features from '/snippets/_sl-plan-info.md'

<Features
cycle="public beta"
product="dbt Semantic Layer"
plan="dbt Cloud Team and Enterprise"
instance="hosted in North America"
/>
<br /><br />

<div className="grid--3-col">

<Card
    title="Get started with the dbt Semantic Layer and MetricFlow"
    body="Build and define metrics with MetricFlow, set up the dbt Semantic Layer, and query them using the Semantic Layer API."
    link="/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/quickstart-sl"
    icon="dbt-bit"/>

<Card
    title="Set up the dbt Semantic Layer"

>     body="Seamlessly set up the dbt Semantic Layer in dbt Cloud using intuitive navigation."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    body="Set up the dbt Semantic Layer in dbt Cloud using intuitive navigation."
```

Author: i'm obsessed with the word seamless 😅

    link="/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/setup-sl"
    icon="dbt-bit"/>

<Card
    title="Available integrations"
    body="Review a wide range of partners you can integrate and query with the dbt Semantic Layer."
    link="/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/avail-sl-integrations"
    icon="dbt-bit"/>

<Card
    title="Product architecture"
    body="Learn about the powerful components that make up the dbt Semantic Layer."
    link="/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/sl-architecture"
    icon="dbt-bit"/>

<Card
    title="Semantic Layer API"
    body="Use the Semantic Layer API to query metrics in downstream tools for consistent, reliable data metrics."
    link="/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/sl-api-overview"
    icon="dbt-bit"/>

</div>

</VersionBlock>

<VersionBlock lastVersion="1.5">

import LegacyInfo from '/snippets/_legacy-sl-callout.md';

<LegacyInfo />

> The dbt Semantic Layer allows data teams to centrally define essential business metrics like `revenue`, `customer`, and `churn` in the modeling layer (your dbt project) for consistent self-service within downstream data tools like BI and metadata management solutions. The dbt Semantic Layer provides the flexibility to define metrics on top of your existing models and then query those metrics and models in your analysis tools of choice.

Reviewer: sugg: consistency between third person and second person 

```suggestion
The dbt Semantic Layer allows your data teams to centrally define essential business metrics like `revenue`, `customer`, and `churn` in the modeling layer (your dbt project) for consistent self-service within downstream data tools like BI and metadata management solutions. The dbt Semantic Layer provides the flexibility to define metrics on top of your existing models and then query those metrics and models in your analysis tools of choice.
```

> The result? You have less duplicate coding for data teams and more consistency for data consumers. 

Reviewer: sugg: for easier translation later 

```suggestion
Resulting in less duplicate coding for data teams and more consistency for data consumers. 
```

> The dbt Semantic Layer has four main parts:

Reviewer: sugg: to be more evergreen for docs maintenance (ie fewer places to update/fix if number of parts change in the future) 

```suggestion
The dbt Semantic Layer has these main parts:
```

- Define your metrics in version-controlled dbt project code using [MetricFlow](/docs/build/about-metricflow) 
	* dbt_metrics is now deprecated

> - Import your metric definitions via the [Discovery API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Import your metric definitions using the [Discovery API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api)
```

> - Query your metric data via the dbt Proxy Server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Query your metric data with the dbt Proxy Server
```

- Explore and analyze dbt metrics in downstream tools

### What makes the dbt Semantic Layer different?

> The dbt Semantic Layer reduces code duplication and inconsistency regarding your business metrics. By moving metric definitions out of the BI layer and into the modeling layer, data teams can feel confident that different business units are working from the same metric definitions, regardless of their tool of choice. If a metric definition changes in dbt, it’s refreshed everywhere it’s invoked and creates consistency across all applications. You can also use the dbt Semantic Layer to query models and use macros.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dbt Semantic Layer reduces code duplication and inconsistency regarding your business metrics. By moving metric definitions out of the BI layer and into the modeling layer, your data teams can feel confident that different business units are working from the same metric definitions, regardless of their tool of choice. If a metric definition changes in dbt, it’s refreshed everywhere it’s invoked and creates consistency across all applications. You can also use the dbt Semantic Layer to query models and use macros.
```

## Prerequisites

> To use the dbt Semantic Layer, you’ll need to meet the following:

Reviewer: sugg: remove intro sentence for conciseness since "prereqs" already imply "need/must"  

```suggestion
```

<Snippet path="sl-prerequisites" />

<Snippet path="sl-considerations-banner" />

## Manage metrics

:::info 📌

New to dbt or metrics? Check out our [quickstart guide](/quickstarts) to build your first dbt project! If you'd like to define your first metrics, try our [Jaffle Shop](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle_shop_metrics) example project.

:::

If you're not sure whether to define a metric in dbt or not, ask yourself the following: 

> *Is this something our teams consistently need to report on?*  

> 

Reviewer: sugg adding a little bit more to this ^ short intro/overview to the section of what it means to "Manage metrics". it's very light and i wasn't sure i understood after reading

An important business metric should be:

- Well-defined (the definition is agreed upon throughout the entire organization)
- Time-bound (able to be compared across time)

> A great example of this is **revenue** &mdash; it can be aggregated on multiple levels (weekly, monthly, etc) and is key for the broader business to understand.

Reviewer: i was taught that em dashes are used to set off phrases and clauses. since this is a complete sentence (not a phrase or clause), suggest using a period or a semicolon  

```suggestion
A great example of this is **revenue**. It can be aggregated on multiple levels (weekly, monthly, and so on) and is key for the broader business to understand.
```

- ✅ `Monthly recurring revenue` or `Weekly active users` or `Average order value` 
- ❌ `1-off experimental metric`

### Design and define metrics

> You can design and define your metrics in a `.yml` files nested under a metrics key in your dbt project, review the following documents: <br />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can design and define your metrics in `.yml` files nested under a metrics key in your dbt project. For more information, refer to these docs: <br />
```

- [dbt metrics](docs/build/metrics) for in-depth detail on attributes, filters, how to define and query your metrics, and [dbt-metrics package](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt_metrics)
- [dbt Semantic Layer quickstart](/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/quickstart-semantic-layer) to get started

## Related questions

<details>
  <summary>How do I migrate from the legacy Semantic Layer to the new one?</summary>
  <div>
    <div>If you're using the legacy Semantic Layer, we highly recommend you <a href="https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-core-in-cloud">upgrade your dbt version </a> to dbt v1.6 or higher to use the new dbt Semantic Layer. Refer to the dedicated <a href="https://docs.getdbt.com/guides/migration/sl-migration"> migration guide</a> for more info.</div>
  </div>
</details>
    
<details>
  <summary>How are you storing my data?</summary>
  <div>

>     <div>The dbt Semantic Layer does not store, or cache, or log your data. On each query to the Semantic Layer, the resulting data passes through dbt Cloud servers where it is never stored, cached, or logged. The data from your data platform gets routed through dbt Cloud servers, to your connecting data tool.</div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <div>The dbt Semantic Layer doesn't store, cache, or log your data. On each query to the Semantic Layer, the resulting data passes through dbt Cloud servers where it's never stored, cached, or logged. The data from your data platform gets routed through dbt Cloud servers to your connecting data tool.</div>
```

  </div>
</details>
<details>
  <summary>Is the dbt Semantic Layer open source?</summary>
  <div>

>     <div>Some components of the dbt Semantic Layer are open source like dbt-core, the dbt_metrics package, and the BSL-licensed dbt-server. The dbt Proxy Server (what is actually compiling the dbt code) and the Discovery API are not open sources. <br></br><br></br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <div>Some components of the dbt Semantic Layer are open source like dbt-core, the dbt_metrics package, and the BSL-licensed dbt-server. The dbt Proxy Server (what is actually compiling the dbt code) and the Discovery API are not open source. <br></br><br></br>
```

> During Public Preview, the dbt Semantic Layer is open to all dbt Cloud tiers (Developer, Team, and Enterprise).<br></br><br></br>

Reviewer: this sentence and the unordered list below it seems _out of place_ for "Is the dbt Semantic Layer open source?" suggest moving the info elsewhere

> During Public Preview, the dbt Semantic Layer is open to all dbt Cloud tiers (Developer, Team, and Enterprise).<br></br><br></br>

Reviewer: sugg: using em dash to "set off" the tier info.

```suggestion
During Public Preview, the dbt Semantic Layer is open to all dbt Cloud tiers &mdash; Developer, Team, and Enterprise.<br></br><br></br>
```

<ul>

> <li>dbt Core users can define metrics in their dbt Core projects and calculate them using macros from the metrics package. To use the dbt Semantic Layer integrations, users will need to have a dbt Cloud account.</li><br></br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<li>dbt Core users can define metrics in their dbt Core projects and calculate them using macros from the metrics package. Using the dbt Semantic Layer integrations requires a dbt Cloud account.
```

<li>Developer accounts will be able to query the Proxy Server using SQL, but will not be able to browse pre-populated dbt metrics in external tools, which requires access to the Discovery API.</li><br></br>
<li>Team and Enterprise accounts will be able to set up the Semantic Layer and Discovery API in the integrated partner tool to import metric definition.</li>
    </ul></div> </div>
</details>
<details>
    <summary>Is there a dbt Semantic Layer discussion hub?</summary>
  <div>

>     <div>Yes absolutely! Join the <a href="https://getdbt.slack.com">dbt Slack community</a> and <a href="https://getdbt.slack.com/archives/C046L0VTVR6">#dbt-cloud-semantic-layer slack channel</a> for all things related to the dbt Semantic Layer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <div>Yes, absolutely! Join the <a href="https://getdbt.slack.com">dbt Slack community</a> and <a href="https://getdbt.slack.com/archives/C046L0VTVR6">#dbt-cloud-semantic-layer slack channel</a> for all things related to the dbt Semantic Layer. 
```

## Explore the dbt Semantic Layer

The dbt Semantic Layer is available to all dbt Cloud plans (Developer, Team, and Enterprise) during [public beta](#public-beta). Start exploring the dbt Semantic Layer by visiting the following pages:

<div className="grid--2-col">

<Card
    title="Get started with MetricFlow and the dbt Semantic Layer"
    body="Build and define metrics, set up the dbt Semantic Layer, and query them using the Semantic Layer APIs."
    link="/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/quickstart-sl"
    icon="dbt-bit"/>

<Card
    title="Set up the dbt Semantic Layer"
    body="Set up the dbt Semantic Layer in dbt Cloud using intuitive navigation."
    link="/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/setup-sl"
    icon="dbt-bit"/>

<Card
    title="Available integrations"
    body="Review a wide range of partners you can integrate and query with the dbt Semantic Layer."
    link="/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/avail-sl-integrations"
    icon="dbt-bit"/>
    
<Card
    title="Semantic Layer API"
    body="Use the Semantic Layer APIs to query metrics in downstream tools."
    link="/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/sl-api-overview"
    icon="dbt-bit"/>

</div>

## Public beta 

> MOVING THIS TO RELEASE NOTE SECTION BECAUSE I DONT THINK THIS BELONGS HERE. ANYTHING THAT SAYS PUBLIC BETA CAN LINK TO RN

Author: i think public beta should not be on this pag and be announced/detailed in the public beta release note. any reference to it can then link to that page. this way, it keeps this page clean and only maintains the relevant/current info

Moving metric definitions out of the BI layer and into the modeling layer allows data teams to feel confident that different business units are working from the same metric definitions, regardless of their tool of choice. If a metric definition changes in dbt, it’s refreshed everywhere it’s invoked and creates consistency across all applications. 

To read more about why you need a universal Semantic Layer, read this [blog post](https://www.getdbt.com/blog/universal-semantic-layer/).

<Lightbox src="/img/sl-architecture.jpg" width="70%" title="Define and query metrics with the dbt Semantic Layer and seamlessly connect with integration tools for reliable organization-wide metrics." />

## Explore the dbt Semantic Layer

> The dbt Semantic Layer is available to all dbt Cloud plans (Developer, Team, and Enterprise) during [public beta](/docs/dbt-versions/release-notes/July-2023/sl-revamp-beta#public-beta). Start exploring the dbt Semantic Layer by visiting the following pages:

Reviewer 2: Probably remove developer here since we discussed the entirety of the dbt Semantic Layer being available to only team and enterprise. The dev / MF part of it is developer
